# Rapid phenotypic and genotypic change in a laboratory schistosome population

__Authors:__ Kathrin S. JUTZELER1,2*, Roy N. PLATT3, Xue LI, Madison MORALES, Robbie DIAZ, Winka LE CLEC’H1, Frédéric D. CHEVALIER1, Timothy J.C. ANDERSON3*

__Affiliation:__
1 Host parasite Interaction program, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, P.O. Box 760549, 78245 San Antonio, Texas, USA.
2 UT Health, Microbiology, Immunology & Molecular Genetics, San Antonio, TX 78229 
3 Disease Intervention and Prevention program, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, P.O. Box 760549, 78245 San Antonio, Texas, USA.

## ABSTRACT
Genomic analysis has revealed extensive contamination among microbes, including malaria parasites, tuberculosis and salmonella. Here we provide direct evidence for recent contamination of a laboratory schistosome population, and we investigate the genomic consequences. The Brazilian Schistosoma mansoni population SmBRE has several distinctive phenotypes, showing poor infectivity, small sporocysts, low levels of cercarial shedding and low virulence in the intermediate snail host, and low worm burden and low fecundity in the vertebrate rodent host. In 2021 we observed a rapid change in SmBRE parasite phenotypes, with a ~ 10x increase in cercarial production and ~4x increase in worm burden. To determine the underlying genomic cause of these changes (rapid evolution or laboratory contamination) we sequenced pools of SmBRE adults and a second parasite population SmLE collected during parasite maintenance between 2015 and 2023. While SmLE populations remained stable over the eight-year period, we observed massive changes in allele frequency across the genome in SmBRE between July 2021 and February 2023, consistent with laboratory contamination. Several features of these results are of interest. (i) We see minimal average change in allele frequencies across time in SmLE where contamination was not detected.  However, a subset of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) show significant change in allele frequency over the eight-year period consistent with genetic drift. (ii) After contamination strong selection (s = ~0.23) drives replacement of low fitness SmBRE with high fitness SmLE alleles. (iii) Allele frequency changed rapidly across the whole genome, with the exception of a region on chromosome 4, where SmBRE alleles were counter selected and remain at high frequency. We were able to detect contamination in this case because SmBRE shows distinctive phenotypes, but this would likely have been missed with phenotypically similar parasites. These results provide a cautionary tale about the importance of tracking the identity of parasite populations, but also showcase a simple approach to monitor changes within populations using molecular profiling of pooled population samples. We also show that drift results in continuous change in the absence of contamination, so parasites maintained in different labs (or sampled from the same lab at different times) will diverge.

__KEY WORDS:__ Schistosoma mansoni, parasite, laboratory populations, laboratory strains, contamination, SmBRE, SmLE
